Post-Execution transaction and SDM specs (#908)
ethereum-optimism/specs: specs/glossary.md

- cf. [Execution Engine Specification][exec-engine]

---

# Post-Execution Transactions

[post-exec]: glossary.md#post-execution-transactions

A class of [EIP-2718] [transaction types][transaction-type] that carry sequencer-provided consensus data.
Post-execution transactions are emitted by the [sequencer], are appended to a block after the last user transaction,
and are not propagated through the public mempool.

> ## Post-Execution Transaction

Reviewer: Do we need both of these? IMO better to just keep the `post-exec-tx` one and drop `post-exec`.

The _post-exec payload_ is the data structure carried by a [post-exec transaction](#post-execution-transaction).
It is a versioned envelope: a `version` byte selects the payload schema, a `blockNumber` field anchors the payload
to the containing block, and the remaining fields are defined by the active schema version.

## Post-Exec Payload Schema Version

[post-exec-schema-version]: glossary.md#post-exec-payload-schema-version

A monotonically assigned identifier that selects the field layout of a [post-exec payload](#post-exec-payload).
Schema versions are described in the [post-exec specification][spec-post-exec]; the version-1 schema is defined by
the [Sequencer-Defined Metering][spec-sdm] specification.

[spec-sdm]: ./protocol/lagoon/sdm.md

## Sequencer-Defined Metering

[sdm]: glossary.md#sequencer-defined-metering

_Sequencer-Defined Metering_ (_SDM_) is the [post-exec payload schema version](#post-exec-payload-schema-version) 1
policy. SDM lets the sequencer include per-transaction gas refunds that adjust canonical gas accounting and fee
settlement.

See the [SDM specification][spec-sdm].

## Canonical Gas

[canonical-gas]: glossary.md#canonical-gas

> Under [Sequencer-Defined Metering](#sequencer-defined-metering), the gas a transaction is accounted for after its
> gas refund is applied: `canonicalGasUsed = evmGasUsed - refund`, where `evmGasUsed` is the raw gas reported by the
> EVM. Canonical gas is the value recorded in transaction receipts and summed into the block's `cumulativeGasUsed`
> and `gasUsed`. It is distinct from the raw EVM gas, and unrelated to the "canonical chain" sense of _canonical_
> used elsewhere in this glossary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under [Sequencer-Defined Metering](#sequencer-defined-metering), canonical gas is the net gas consumed by a transaction for accounting purposes (i.e. after its
gas refund is applied). Specifically: `canonicalGasUsed = evmGasUsed - refund`, where `evmGasUsed` is the raw gas reported by the
EVM. Canonical gas is the value recorded in transaction receipts and summed into the block's `cumulativeGasUsed`
and `gasUsed`fields. It is distinct from the raw EVM gas, and unrelated to the "canonical chain" sense of _canonical_
used elsewhere in this glossary.
```

Reviewer: (optional, take it if you like it!)
